https://dl.allaboutbirds.org/nabirds

The dataset we selected is from NABirds, who collaborated with the Cornell Lab of Ornithology to create a collection of 48,000 pictures of 400+ different species of birds. This dataset is very well documented, with at least 100 images of each species, as well as further documentation for whether it is a male, female and juvenile bird. Our research question for the project is how robust can we make the classifier to real-world image issues such as lighting, blur, distance, and so on using data augmentation, filter selection and removing background bias. We felt that this is an important topic to approach with current climate and environmental challenges affecting humans and animals alike. Monitoring the species health of local birds is crucial to maintaining a healthy ecosystem, and precise classification of endangered species is necessary to ensure conservation efforts and laws are allocated towards where they are needed. We want to develop a CNN that can identify birds to assist in these efforts of making better conservation decisions and long term preservation. Knowing the balance of male to female and the population of juvenile birds can help measure it– so our goal is to create a model that can be generalized to lower quality images of birds for analysis. 
	Our proposed architectural roadmap is built around ResNet. Because the data set lists itself as a “fine-grained” classification problem, we will likely need a deep network, which can introduce parameter explosion. It also mitigates vanishing gradient problems, which will be crucial for our task. We will use the ResNet-18 model as proposed in the lecture. The dataset provides training and testing sets, which we will resize and perform further data augmentation to if necessary. Then, for the test set, we will make sure to standardize them to 224x224 in the center if necessary. We may also increase the dimensions/resolution of the image or the Resnet model if the classification task is still too difficult.
